Stop the discussion and use the technology already

I argue that people in Western societies are entitled and this can inhibit the benefit we could be getting from the technology.

Why not stop with the wide-spread debates and actually implement a system that is used and improved on, in real life? Right now, it looks like we are searching for a “golden rule” that would satisfy all the people of the world before we move forward. There is no satisfying all the people of the world, right? We have already made the industry wait for it now…

In academia, there has been more than a century-long discussion on “how would you act in the situation where you know certain people will die as a direct result of your action” - the trolley problem. We still do not have the right answer even after the discussion expanded to the general public about a decade ago when autonomous driving became a reachable goal with a whole industry growing around the idea. There has been a fight with all sides looking to secure supporters ever since. Discussing the problem has not taken us recognisably closer to a generally acceptable implementation, I reckon.

What would have happened to the first mass-produced automobile and it’s design more than a century ago if met with opposition from a crowd of opinionated non-experts? We might be still riding horses.

All jokes aside - why do we need autonomous driving? I think the benefit should be clear for every one person. If not, then one can decide not to use the technology after all. This is the liberal side of the story to the industry the social circles are looking for.
The conservative side to the story comes from legislation and state control in order to create a baseline implementation. Nothing else is needed in order to get going and start with the iterations. Think of it as a “Proof of Concept” where a government decides to collaborate with an automaker and allow for (very close to) real world implementations. A day in the life of that system can provide more insight into every aspect of autonomous driving (including morality) than years of philosophical discussions.

It might be a leap from the Western ideals and probably won’t happen in the Western societies but we should look in the mirror at the same time and not take it is as inevitability - can we stop complaining, blaming, looking out for our personal selves and start contributing instead? If we won’t, there are cultures that will. Essentially, the first adopters will have a strong say in deciding how autonomous driving will look like for the rest of the world.


As an advocate for trust, honesty and human decency, I need to make a small commentary on the presented view of self-sacrifice in the paper -

Self-sacrifice is not contra-intuitive as the authors suggest but an essential part of what makes us human. What do you think our chances for survival would have been if we did not learn to cooperate; to understand the negative sides of crowding out mutual goals?
