Fear is a reaction. Courage is a decision. Humans are messy.
- inspired by Sir Winston Churchill

I argue that decision making within the field of AI should not be looked at from the perspective of how best to synthesise humanity into it. While we are arguably best natural decision-makers that evolution has produced, we are still relatively terrible at it. Think of the wide spectrum of what can be considered and what you personally consider essential in the process of finding and making the best possible decision.

Firstly, we hold an innate internal monitoring mechanism in the form of emotions which guides us towards a more certain biological survival as individuals. Secondly, we have desires which are grounded in thousands of years of biological development of our species as well. Thirdly, we have developed a personal style towards handling decision-making as a process through upbringing and the current environment around us.

Are we looking at how to improve the human species so that AI could be considered an improved version of the human? I think best for now (at least) would be to look at decision-making as something we don’t know how to handle as humans. While we are amazing at “flight-or-fight” situations and finding ways for reproducing, these are driven by sympathetic nervous system. Reasoning in the complex world beyond survival is still unlocked for us as well. And maybe it will stay this way forever as we are not designed to be “as intelligent as possible” but rather “as intelligent as needed for survival” through evolution.

I will leave a quote of the Stoic origin with you; exemplifying  the sum of mess people are:

Limiting one’s desires actually helps to cure one of fear. ‘Cease to hope … and you will cease to fear.’ … Widely different [as fear and hope] are, the two of them march in unison like a prisoner and the escort he is handcuffed to. Fear keeps pace with hope … both belong to a mind in suspense, to a mind in a state of anxiety through looking into the future. Both are mainly due to projecting our thoughts far ahead of us instead of adapting ourselves to the present.
- Seneca, Letters from a Stoic
